excited to have our next speaker here
today our next speaker is dr. Thomas
Seyfried
he is a professor of biology at Boston
College he has received his PhD in
genetics and biochemistry from the
University of Illinois he holds a
master's degree in genetics from
Illinois State University
he was a postdoctoral fellow in the
Department of Neurology
at the Yale University School of
Medicine and then served as faculty as
an assistant professor of neurology dr.
Seyfried previously served as chair
scientific advisory committee member for
the National tastes acts and allied
disease Association he has received a
Lifetime Achievement Award for his work
on cancer from the Academy of
complementary and integrative medicine
he presently serves on several editorial
boards including those for nutrition and
metabolism neurochemical research the
germinal journal of lipid research and
ANS ASN neuro dr. Seyfried it has over
180 peer-reviewed publications and he is
the author of the book cancer as a
metabolic disease dr. Seyfried served
with distinction in the United States
Army in the 1st Cavalry Division during
the Vietnam War he has received numerous
medals and commendations please join me
in welcoming dr. Thomas Avery I want to
speak to you today about what we have we
view the origin of cancer some of the
problems and then talk about how we can
move forward with effective therapies
based on ireia reevaluation of what this
disease actually is so I like to start
off with kind of a report card if you
will how are we doing in our attempts
to manage this disease so this is just
over the last five years I have data
that go back to 1990 but if you just
look at the data at least from data from
the American Cancer Society so from 2013
to 2017
new cases deaths per year deaths per day
not good all right so how would we rate
our progress in managing cancer in the
United States I would say F alright in
fact the rate of increase vedettes per
year is now surpassing to some extent
the rate of new cases you know so we
have to say to ourselves so 1,600 people
at bay are dying from cancer in the
United States I just came back from
China they have about eight and 9,000 in
fact it's overtaken heart disease in
China cancer it's all over the world
increasing increasing deaths so we have
to ask ourselves what's going on here we
run for this type of cancer we swim for
that that we're raising money for cancer
all the time the NIH is increasing
budgets for cancer pink ribbons all this
kind of stuff kids running biking
swimming raising money for cancer
research and what do we get more cancer
how could this happen how is it possible
that we can't significantly drop the
death rate for this disease and that has
to do with how we view the origin of the
disease and this is in my view the big
problem is it a genetic disease as we've
been told or is it a mitochondrial
metabolic disease that I'll tell you
about this is a simple cartoon of a cell
so you see the nucleus in the center and
the little bean shaped organelle is the
mitochondrion to get the plasma membrane
ok cancer cells are screwed up in so
many different ways right
we know we have mutations in the nucleus
is no denying that although we know of a
number of cancers that have no mutations
in the mutant nucleus very few people
talk about that and then we have damage
in the mitochondria and the mitochondria
is the organelle that
the little bean shape there and the
Orthodox model they controls to get the
energy of the cell
both of these organelles are screwed up
together with a variety of other
organelles inside that cell so what's
the origin of the disease the present
Dogma says if the genetic mutations that
are causing this disease and I'll show
you tests of evidence that say that's
not the case and this is what I think is
the crux of the problem I think this is
what's what the problem is so and as I
put these slides up and keep saying this
over and over again cancer is a genetic
disease according to the dogmatic view
and this hallmarks of cancer by Hanahan
and Weinberg pretty much solidifies this
whole process there's a number of other
big papers saying the same thing cancer
cells carry the oncogenic and tumor
suppressor mutations that define cancer
is a genetic disease alright so um this
is on the NCI website go on the NCI
website national cancer institute cancer
is a genetic disease go into any college
textbook biology biochemistry cell
biology cancer is a genetic disease this
has now become a dogmatic view an
irrefutable truth no one discusses any
other alternative except cancer is a
genetic disease and this Dogma has now
indoctrinated several generations of
physicians and scientists into this
worldview of what this disease is
sixteen hundred people a day are dyin
now here's a cartoon from one of the
biology textbooks to introduce the young
student into the nature of what we're
talking about we got a car that's
speeding out of control with no brakes
to illustrate the concept of tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes so the
brakes are like tumor suppressor genes
the car has no brakes the cell has no
brakes the scar is speeding the
oncogenes are are forcing this group of
cells so cell division out of control is
that is the phenotype of what we're
talking about
alright the signature issue of cancer
cell division out of control driven by
oncogenes and defective tumor suppressor
genes accumulation of random mutations
the development of cancer cell so we
have a normal cell and then we have on
the far right we would
the malignant cell and you can see its
dysmorphic how many mutations cause
cancer nobody knows all right if this is
not determined one to four you know some
tumors some tumors have thousands and
thousands this guy says there might be
millions of tumors the sir
Sir Michael Stratton and they spent
enormous amounts of energy and effort
trying to find all the mutations in
these tumor cells and nobody really
knows what's going on with this stuff
now the end result what we have is the
result of this dogmatic view of what the
nature of cancer is is personalized
therapy personalized medicine you can
call it what you want
it's the new thing personalized therapy
based on cancer mutations and our
attempt to either diagnose the disease
or potentially manage the disease you
see this woman staring into the screen
looking at a bunch of spots looking with
so-called mutations at breast cancer
maybe maybe can help the diagnosis or
$7,200 to run a scan on your tumor cells
to see what mutations might be there now
this would be all well and good if that
information was really what we're really
helpful and whether or not the mutations
meant anything all right
so if the cancer is not a genetic
disease and these mutations are
downstream epiphenomena then this
activity is a complete waste of time and
money so when you try to tell people
that's not what they thought it was the
dogmatic view is often when you try to
change dogma you Pete and you show them
evidence they don't want to look at it
they don't want to talk about it they
don't want to hear about it because it's
challenging dogma is a powerful effect
on the human brain it can be a religion
it can be politics or it can be a
scientific dogmatic view so what I had
done I don't have time to go through all
the research present here I'll summarize
it but basically I plucked some
observations out of a leisure or
literature over decades that had been
published in various peer-reviewed
journals and put them all together in
this one paper evaluating when you take
the nucleus of a tumor cell and put it
into a sign of PLAs above a normal sound
and then if you take the the the normal
nucleus and put it into a cytoplasm of a
tumor cell what do you get
and how do you interpret those data
based on the two theories the cancer is
a mitochondrial metabolic disease cancer
is a nuclear genetic disease how do you
interpret the results from those
experiments and these experiments were
done on all kinds of different models of
cancer done in different different
systems by different investigators most
of the investigators were premiere
leaders in the field and they didn't
interpret their results in the light of
the two competing theories so it was
kind of ambiguous at best so now that
I've identified this I allow individuals
themselves to go and read this paper but
listen to what anybody else tells you
you if you're interested in this subject
you will read that paper and you will
come to your own decision as how you
view those data and that's what I say
let let people read it for themselves so
what I've done and my students is this
is simply a figure a cartoon that
summarizes a lot of what was in those
papers in a very simplistic way green
cells beget green cells
that's normal cells red cells beget
tumor red cells these are tumor cells
tumor cells begin other tumor cells what
are the tumor cells that come from which
is dysregulated growth coming from is it
driven by the mutations in the nucleus
as the dogma would have us believe
or is it defects in the cytoplasm in the
mitochondria which are also defective in
these cells so the experiments were done
very clearly in multiple different
systems
you take the red nucleus plucked it out
of the cytoplasm of the tumor cell and
you put it into the cytoplasm of the
normal cell and you got normal cells
sometimes normal tissues sometimes a
whole Mouse or frog 12 from the nucleus
of a tumor cell not this regulated cell
growth that you would have expected if
the driver genes which are actually
driving the phenotype on the other hand
like Israeli Schaffer did they took the
nucleus out of them the normal green
cell and put it into the cytoplasm of
the tumor cell and they either got dead
cells or tumor cells they never got
normal cells and then that and bennicker
pappu from Baylor College of Medicine
switched the mitochondria he was able to
show that people green mitochondria in a
red cell you got you got to convert the
cell to a normal growth pattern
completely opposite of what the gene
theory would have said all right so
these
these data clearly indicate that somatic
mutation is along cannot be responsible
for the origin of this disease the
course driving the phenotype of the
diseases which is dysregulated cell
growth these are the strongest data to
date that this that disprove the gene
theory well if that's the case what are
we doing hey I don't want to look I
don't wanna hear about this I don't want
to talk about it I don't want to look at
it okay somatic mutations are not the
origin of cancer and then we get cancer
well Otto Warburg had this defined quite
a while ago back in the 1920s and 30s
cancer arises from damage to cellular
respiration okay I can't breathe how am
I going to live
fermentation gradually compensates for
insufficient respiration cancer cells
continue to ferment lactate like the gas
of fermentation in the presence of
oxygen which is the Warburg effect you
shouldn't be fermenting in the presence
of oxygen because that would be a normal
pass through effect cancer cells have an
abnormal past their effect they continue
to ferment in the presence of oxygen
what Warburg did not know and that we
are now working on we're able to show
that the cancer cells not only confirm
nth carbohydrate they are glucose they
also ferment the glutamine which he did
not know about which is in my view the
missing link in his whole theory and
will be able to show that shortly
enhance fermentation is the signature
metabolic malady of all cancer cells
right every if you look at the genetics
of any cancer cell it's going to be
different every cell in that tumor is
going to have a different genetic
profile of mutations but they're all
fermenting so why are we chasing the
mutations when they differ from every
cell every tumor every and all of them
are fermenting doesn't it make sense to
target the common pathophysiological
problem of these cells than chasing all
these secondary effects 1,600 people a
day are dying okay look at this this is
a very simplistic overview of energy
metabolism I we treat each this through
our freshmen students at Boston College
were not even biology majors we breathe
air we get most of our energy through
oxidative phosphorylation eighty to
ninety percent of the energy we get
comes from ox fuss and generated ATP we
get much less oxygen from my clinic
pathway in the cytoplasm or in the
suction okay like a step in the Krebs
cycle so we get very little that's
called substrate level phosphorylation
oxidative phosphorylation the teeth in
the krebs cycle TCA cycle most of our
energy comes from respiration oxygen
what cancer cells are doing is to
generating more and more of their energy
from substrate level phosphorylation
which allows them to live in hypoxic
environments and less and less through
electron transport chain so when we
reconfigure the facts of disease in
light of a mitochondrial metabolic
disease we can explain the majority of
observations that have been found over
the decades in this disease the
oncogenic paradox has perplexed cancer
researchers and scientists for decades
it was first point out by Albert st.
gurgi back in 1979 and what it basically
says is how is it possible that any kind
of a plethora of provocative agents from
the environment or from inheritance and
I'll talk about that could cause cancer
through a common pathophysiological
mechanism it wasn't understood in fact
if you read Sid mukajee's book the
emperor of all maladies food surprise
winning a book was on the bestseller
list in The New York Times for over a
year he struggled with the aquagenic
paradigm check 280 page 285 and 303 of
SIDS book and you'll see I would not
understand heaven so happening every one
of those provocative agents that I point
out there does one thing it damages
respiration it produces reactive oxygen
species and we've heard some of that
earlier the today reactive oxygen
species can be good when they're in low
but could be bad if they're too high and
what happens is the mitochondria becomes
defective and they start blowing out
reactive oxygen species which are
carcinogenic and mutagenic therefore
causing the point mutations and they
promise all the defects that you see in
the nucleus are coming in directly as
the result of the Ross the Ross are also
further damaging the mitochondria then
signaling the mitochondria suffocating
now it's not producing enough energy
well if it doesn't produce enough energy
it's going to die how would these cells
going to survive if they can't get
energy through ox fast they better be
able to ferment and that's what the
bottom look at the bottom showing here
oxidative phosphorylation goes down
substrate level phosphorylation goes up
that
signal the nucleus how am I going to get
an inefficient energy source into this
cell to keep its Clifford of capacitor
to keep it alive and therefore alga
genes turn on which are transcription
factors that upregulate to transporters
to bring in glucose and glutamine into
that cell so what we have seen as being
causative are actually an effect of
trying to keep the cell alive with it
with a non oxidative fermentation
process so carcinogens radiation hypoxia
information rare inherited mutations
Braca one p53 they will only cause
cancer if they in fact that means the
rest of the mitochondria if they don't
damage the mitochondria don't get cancer
even though you might have that mutation
therefore their secondary not primary
viruses age I went through all of that
so then what happens you get the Warburg
that cells start to begin to ferment
so the first three hallmarks of cancer
insufficient regulation growth out of
control are simply the cell falling back
on an ancient metabolic program that
existed before oxygen came into the pond
to the planet some two and a half
billion years ago when everything on the
planet was a fermenter okay so they're
all fermenting and what do they do they
ferment any kind of a molecule that you
could find in the micro environment when
the fermentation fuel ran out the cell
would die so we're seeing that this is
the strategy that we're going to take to
manage this so they entered their
default state then you could get now
what happens these cells ferment in our
body they throw out
metabolized molecules like lactic acids
like cynic acid carbonic tanks all these
different things acidifying the
microenvironment leading to an
anti-angiogenic effect into a chan geo
genic effect all right so this is all
explained okay so now apoptosis why
avoid a cancer cells avoid program cell
death how is that possible who controls
the cell the life of ourselves the
mitochondrion they are the a pathetic
signal they are the kill switch of our
cell
if the kill switch is broken this thing
is gone right it doesn't have control so
the mitochondria actually control the
life of our cell and tells the cell it
should be dead now it's broken so this
cell continues to survive it is
surviving on fermentation how do we get
metastasis this is the big killer of
most people metastasis spreading to from
origin so if the metastasis doesn't kill
you the treatments they use
treated sometimes will kill you okay so
how do we get metastasis okay so here we
have a bunch of normal cells columnar
epithelial they become they become
dysmorphic okay through one of the
provocative agents in the
microenvironment cells are now our
immune system cells they come in to heal
the wound their wound healing cells all
right they throw out cytokines and
growth factors to try to heal the wound
this is wrong this shouldn't so they're
doing what they're genetically
programmed to do in a wrong context
now that fuels the cells to grow even
faster and bort were more malignant
macrophages are also highly fuse
agenting if they can't they can actually
fuse with other cells to facilitate
wound healing now what happens is this
these cells are now diluting their
mitochondria in the cytoplasm becoming
more and more destabilized so what
eventually emerges is a macrophage with
abnormal mitochondria so this macrophage
is already genetically programmed to
enter and exit the bloodstream to live
in hypoxic environments this is the
toughest cell in our body and now it's
wrong and it's running around it's very
hard to kill don't do new mutations are
not necessary well so they live in
hypoxic environments so what does that
say well this anti-angiogenic therapy
SAR not going to work Avastin crap all
right spending millions of dollars on
anti-angiogenic therapies and one and
the very cell you're trying to kill
evolve to living up hypoxia it's not
going to work that doesn't work in fact
some of the leaders came out and said
yeah this stuff isn't working all right
so what do they do they what do they eat
that's what you have to know what are
these cells eating they can't live
without energy okay so they eat
glutamine
we know that our immune system is driven
by glutamine and glucose so if most
cancer cells appendage of fermentation
how do we manage this stuff and one
strategy is to take away their
fermentable fuels not complicated okay
so what are we try we tried at first we
tried calorie restriction fasting
ketogenic diets this kind of stuff what
it does is lowers blood sugar it doesn't
it creates a system of starvation but
it's not starvation it maintains
minerals and nutrients you can lower the
fermentable fuel glucose and elevate the
non fermentable ketone bodies tumor
cells can't use ketone bodies because
their mitochondria shot you also get
biogenesis of my
Andrea you can help the little cells get
really healthy the tumor cells start to
get hammered and water only fasting is
the way to do this in humans calorie
restriction and mouse so that's why we
went is the ketogenic diets because you
know nobody wants to fast you try doing
it's not easy so what are these
ketogenic diets a lot of talk about this
most people using it for weight loss or
whatever you know we're using it to as a
medicine we use it as a medicine to kill
cancer cells okay so it's a it's a low
carb high fat moderate protein diet but
it's it's not that simple the types of
carbs fats and proteins and their ratios
play an extremely important role this is
not an Atkins diet okay you got to be
able to lower that blood sugar if you
want to kill these tumor cells you can't
eat a lot of protein or raise his blood
sugar so it doesn't work if you don't do
it right that's why I say on the bottom
it's got to be restricted because if you
know if you too much of it it doesn't
work so people need to know that and
what we did is we published a lot of
papers showing that if you can lower the
blood sugar which is the dark line and
raised the ketones
you can then transfer transition the
entire body over to a new hambo static
state so the ketone bodies are going to
serve as an alternative fuel to glucose
especially for our brain our brains are
driven by glucose but we evolved to be
able to burn ketones as an alternative
to glucose so by lowering glucose we put
pressure on the fermented capability of
the tumor cell and isn't raising ketones
we're now enhancing the health and
vitality of normal cells and we can then
use drugs to push blood sugars down to
really really low levels because
everything is transitioned over to the
alternative fuel so once we can get
these people mice or patients into this
managed growth then the tumors are now
become vulnerable and the normal cells
become protected and that's the strategy
that we're using to manage the disease
now the first person to do this one of
the first person that Lyndon Ebeling
took two little girls hopeless cases at
Case Western Reserve and treated them
with ketogenic diets when they were
given up as hopeless by the medical
establishment at that time she lowered
blood sugar raised ketones both of these
hopeless kids responded remarkably well
you should read the paper the quality of
life improves significantly and their
overall survival increased dramatically
so I look at this like oh my god
going on here I got to see what I got to
do with this on the mouse and we did it
on a mouse so this is a very aggressive
CT - a malignant astrocytoma like a
glioblastoma and I'll talk more about
that so we just simply lowered blood
sugar by giving them a count of 40
percent restriction standard diet height
as a high carbohydrate diet unrestricted
food same diet restricted for the
reduced 40% and we got anywhere from a
65 to an 85 percent reduction of the
size of the tumor just by coming back to
calories so what's going on here so each
one of these squares is a mouse under a
different dietary condition we did
linear regression analysis okay as as
the as the blood sugar goes down ketones
go up it's an evolutionary conserved
adaptations of fasting as blood sugar
goes down the size of the tumor went
down the higher the sugar the faster the
tumor grows the lower the sugar the
slower the tumor grows this has been
repeated a human's number of cases and
humans have been shown higher you want
your tumor to grow fast make sure your
blood sugar as high as you can get it
chug that the high-fructose corn syrup
right you go to oncology clinics to get
an ice-cream Enfamil all this kind of
stuff it is published in the literature
let me read this stuff anyway what's the
mechanism by which it works so we
published the mechanism key but I think
we heard from dr. collaborators you have
to have mechanisms we published the
mechanism anti-angiogenic
anti-inflammatory pro-apoptotic there's
no cancer drug that can do this that's
been published again and again by so
many people what's the mechanism what's
the magnet the mechanism now I'm going
to talk a little bit badly or blastoma
as we know Senator McCain is now
struggling with this and we've known
many other people in the past who
unfortunately had to struggle with this
this is a very aggressive tumor vault
dysmorphic kinds of cells they invade
the tumor cells invade throughout the
brain using secondary structures of sure
can metastasize out there's a very
difficult and I'll show you the data
okay so here's a section of GBM you can
see the midline shift
the crushing most of these poor people
they die from inter-cranial pressure
from the expanding tumor the edema and
everything else that goes on there right
here the blue cells what is showing you
is cancer cells migrating through the
brain using on the veer Cal Robbins
space it's the space on top of the blood
on top of the blood vessels that's a
little space and these tumor cells will
run through they'll use these blood
vessels as a railroad system to get
through your brain so even if you try to
cut out the center part of the tumor
paying these guys are out so this is
what makes it so difficult and this is
why some of these L we're gonna do me
know if they're good they're on the
other side of the blood vessel they're
not going to be touched with um you know
theory for the most part so it's not
going to work now somebody might find a
person here and there but basically it's
not going to work for the majority of
people no matter what people say now
what's going on in the mitochondria of
these tumor cells so I have here the
normal mitochondria see the stripes
those are called cristae they contain
the proteins and the lipids of the
electron transport chain which give
these cells an opportunity to respire
you see the glial blastoma mitochondria
right there it's crystallises these are
ghost mitochondria you find all kinds of
weird things on the mitochondria all
kinds of tumors not just Leo blastoma
so if those stripes and those cristae
contain the very molecules necessary for
generating energy through oxidative
phosphorylation and those structures are
not there what do you think the
probability is of that organelle
producing energy through ox fossa the
very structures needed aren't there
makes sense they can't do it right
that's why they're fermenting and
blowing out massive amounts of lactic
acid okay
we have seen this over and over and over
again on tissues from humans and mice
and rats damage to the mitochondria
structure and function and the field
ignores it they so know now cancer cells
abnormal respiration it's unbelievable
so now what's driving the beast as I
said fermentation drives the beast
okay comes glucose and glutamine glucose
come pouring into this these cells
through an upregulation of glucose
transported the glucose is metabolized
through the EM the Meyerhoff pathway to
pyruvate which is then dumped outside
Micro outside of the micro virus and
Sidda fiying one of the many molecules
it also goes down the PPP is the pentose
phosphate pathway
produce
precursors for nucleotide synthesis so
the cells can grow and they also produce
a lot of glutathione which protects them
against oxidative stress very important
to know that and then we have on the
bottom we have the glutamine pouring
into these cells the mi nitrogen is used
to make proteins and nucleotides the
glutamate then enters either dumped into
the micro environment to facilitate the
invasion also goes into the mitochondria
converted to alpha ketoglutarate and
generates a massive amount of energy to
substrate level phosphorylation at the
succinylcholine a step which Warburg
didn't know about okay that's the
missing link in Warburg's theory these
cells are fermenting and it makes it
look like the mitochondria are working
for generating ATP but it's not coming
through on to us so let me show you what
we do the people in the clinic I
published this paper and a top journal
Lancet Oncology
so persons diagnosed with GBM it's
unbelievable you know you just shocking
where you get that kind of a diagnosis
it's just brutal so before the family or
the patient really understands what's
going on you know they have you taken
the tumor out right away and that
creates a necrotic micro environment
because they always say can never get at
all these gbm's are rarely the bulk a
hundred percent is always a piece or
some part lip remaining and then that
the the damage that you've done for the
micro environment for the surgical both
the bulking will facilitate the return
and then we start to irradiated off like
the bolts up there it creates more edema
creates necrosis
well that's freeing up glutamine
breaking the glutamine glutamate cycle
very tightly regulated cycle in the
brain for those of you do neurobiology
ok we're freeing up the very molecules
that are going to be driving the beast
and because the cells the head starts to
swell this is the swelling the edema we
give them high-dose dexamethasone right
did lower the swelling the edema and
that raises blood sugar all right so
what are we doing here to these poor
people we're creating a micro
environment that's going to guarantee
the recurrence of this tumor and the
likely demise of the patient and many of
these tumor cells are infected with
human cytomegalovirus was acts as a
supercharged of bringing glucose and
glutamine into the the debilitating
tumor cells so what do you think the
outcome is going to be on patients
survival from the standard of care
and these are the data published over
and over and over again all right
look at that red line those are the
people that were irradiated no survivors
and this is done over and over again and
then they had the temp that toxic
temozolomide in there and that was the
first major breakthrough and legal
blastoma brain cancer they live a little
bit longer from a toxic drug that also
increases driver mutations try to figure
that out these things make the patients
get sick they have diarrhea vomiting
nausea all these are indirect forms of
calorie restriction it's not working
okay here's this now good talking about
individuals but remember Brittany
Maynard it's a big big story in People
magazine and there were a few years ago
all right diagnosed with a low-grade
low-grade tumor she was 27
all right low-grade okay and women month
it ripped into a GBM because you poked
around some evidence now that we poked
into these tumors he can explode them
this is her picture right after she got
married so what happened now is she goes
on the standard of care you can see her
on the right here with the smaller face
moon face from up from high-dose
steroids as we look the same and then
there was a big article in People
magazine my decision to die she does I
want to go through the standard of care
anyway I want to do this she's gonna
throw the Talon made it big she was from
California she said to go to Oregon they
have a Death with Dignity thing up there
so she dies with dignity on November 4
November 1st 2014 and the big article in
People magazine was oh is it morally
right to take your own life with death
with dignity not the fact that the
standard of care put her in that place
in the first place was no discussion
about the failure of the standard of
care on that article reading People
magazine now this is another case Pablo
Kelly they diagnosed with the
glioblastoma in 2014 same year it's
Britney he contacted me he said what
should I do I say I don't know I didn't
tell him don't do standard of care he
came to that decision on his own he told
those guy were you gonna be dead in less
than three months Pablo three or four
months you're gonna be dead he's I'm
doing the ketogenic diet
I said well good good luck I don't know
what to say you know it's very early in
our experiment we didn't know so I
thought I did I hadn't heard from Pablo
and I don't know your
a half I said maybe the guy's dead I
don't know all of a sudden this paper
Herald Express in British South devaron
cancer sufferer Pablo defies doctor with
special diet I just spoke Thai just
emailed him two weeks ago I said Pablo
are you doing here still surviving
20:18 rejected the standard of care he's
not alone now there's more and more
people that are rejecting the standard
of care because they want to live and
that's what Pablo said I want to live
okay he's I'm just gonna I'm gonna meet
him at a meeting in London next fall
he's gonna be one of the keynote
speakers don't tell everybody how he
survived he's gonna be four years yeah
how rare it is to get the before year
survivor but the glioblastoma not not
not not to many people in that category
so the problem is is we have a lot of
patients they don't know what to do the
physicians don't know what to do and the
patients don't know what to do how do
you know how do you implement this stuff
okay I can tell you all this stuff but
I'll sit on it how do I have a two
minute where am I going to do so my
students that I came up with this
glucose keeps on index calculator all it
does is calculate the ratio in
millimolar of glucose to ketones and we
predicted that maybe if you can get your
ratio to 1.0 or below you bring in your
body into this new hope this new
metabolic state that's going to put
pressure on the dividing cells and maybe
that can keep you alive a little bit
longer there's not a higher quality of
life so we've been doing that and people
are now feeding us back information
saying yes if I get into that zone
I can I can hold down the beast I'm not
saying we cure the cancer but I'm saying
we can hold it down we can slow it down
well if you can slow it down then you
have opportunities to attack from other
angles and that's what I'll show you
what we do so what we did then with my
colleagues George Yeo is an account
oncologist from from Annapolis Maryland
Joel maroon who is the team surgeon for
the Pittsburgh Steelers distinguished
neurosurgeon Tom D'Agostino from from
South Florida myself we put together
this press box concept to treat cancer
not only GBM but all cancers and you can
see the red we want to take the sick
patients we want to first of all try to
manage it as best we can and then we go
for the resolution all right so we have
to we have to slow down the growth and
we do that now this concept of press
pulse came from paleobiology if you can
believe it it turns out that in the past
history of the earth there was
extinctions that occurred with two
unlikely events happened at the same
time okay a chronic stress on a
population coupled with a massive like a
meteor hit or some volcanic explosion or
whatever wiped out everything so we took
that concept that paleo biology and
brought it into the field of oncology
and to do it the key is to do this
without harming the normal cells of the
body this is the that strategy you've
got to be able to degrade and eliminate
the tumor without killing or harming any
of the normal cells in the body and this
press pulse concept is designed to do
that so we get the patients into the
blood glucose ketone zone will you
stress management because people are all
freaked out by having cancer anyway they
get freaked out that blood cortisol goes
up by glucose so you got to use all
kinds of stress management techniques
exercise and things and then we hit them
with pulses doses timing and scheduling
of drugs that target glucose and
glutamine and we use hyperbaric oxygen
and I have plans to summer to do ozone
therapy Avendano so therapy yet but from
what I heard today and what I've heard
from others it sounds like it's perfect
for this combined ketogenic diets with
ozone therapy together with these other
strategy I haven't done it yet so I
can't say anything about it but I had
the plan I have a plan there's a
veterinarian who wants to work with me
so I said okay well give it a shot and
it might be easier than hyperbaric
oxygen why we do hyperbaric oxygen and
potentially ozone to replace radiation
therapy because both of them are going
to kill the tumor cell through oxidative
stress but we want to do it so not to
harm the normal cells so though it says
timing and scheduling in my mind and
certain time and I have to be honest
with you we're not there yet we're still
fumbling around with this but the
strategy is there and I think in time
most of this strategy of press Falls
will make most other cancer therapies
obsolete just a matter of time
[Applause]
now how do we do this
we just input pulling out of the air we
developed a tool we developed natural
models of glial blastoma spontaneous in
the brain not these genetically created
things that you see here about these are
natural things if you want to make
advanced you better make sure you have
the right tool so I said let's try to
kill this that this is a VM glioblastoma
mines all the characteristics of you we
published this you know you can see the
papers so here's one of our attempts
okay you can see the tumor in the in the
brain here's the hippocampus and they
high standard high carbohydrate standard
high carb diet tumors ripping right
through the brain using those fear Cal
robbing spaces doing all this the tumor
on the right calorie restriction
ketogenic diets the invasion was much
less but we weren't killing all the
tumor cells what's going on I threw
everything I think but I mean I can't
believe what I did to these poor mice a
stop that to them I couldn't stop it
with targeting glucose sorry what are
they living on what are they but I got
to eat think I don't they got a live
right what's glue I said let's try the
glutamine thing so we used on an old
drug unpatentable that was used years
ago in the oncology field they don't use
it anymore because they didn't know how
to use it was it used correctly but it
had worked on a number of people so we
said try it because we need to protest
the hypothesis is it glutamine that's
killing that's keeping these guys alive
so we recently targets contaminate so it
doesn't let the glutamine anywhere into
the cell it makes it stops the glue
tammany so you don't get the glutamate
or the nitrogen so we put the tumor
cells into the mouse's brain wait three
days until it's a raging tumor and then
and then we started the diet we had two
diets the high carb and the ketogenic
restricted as the press and then we
pulse in every couple of days we've done
with the done now we stopped the
experiment in 15 days because the guys
eating the high carbon diet supply are
going out on us right become a moribund
so but the other guys getting the
depressed pulse are looking really good
okay they're looking wow they're they're
upset that we have to stop the
experiment because they have to
sacrifice their life so we can look and
see what's going on okay so we Jenna the
engine sent cells are engineered to be
bioluminescent so we can take and
quantify the degree of tumor growth by
looking at bioluminescence imaging so on
the top is the
you have to put sunglasses on some of
these the tours are raging hot from from
from the guy carbohydrate diet the
ketogenic diet restricted has a little
bit of an effect I told you we couldn't
stop these things Don I don't have the
dot Don by itself was a little bit
better than the ketogenic diet
restricted but there was still a lot of
hot tumor cells when you put the diet
and the drug together there was no light
in the brain there was no light I said
what happened what happened so we then
looked at individual mice these are each
numbers a mouse under a single mouse so
the ketogenic diet everybody had a light
in the brain that means we weren't able
to kill and eliminate this tumor with
ketogenic diet restricted by itself but
when you put the die ended on together
that those little blurbs at the bottom
are background and there was one guy who
was number six there he had a little bit
of a light only because he backed off a
couple of injections on him but we know
we could explain why he broke through
but all the others were pretty much no
light the only thing that was
spectacular was that by administering
the drug in the ketogenic diet we could
deliver twice as much drug on target
then fill it when we deliver the drug
with a high carbohydrate so whatever's
going on here ketogenic diets are
facilitating the delivery of the drug to
the target so that means we can use less
concentration of the drug which is great
then we said what's going on inside the
cells of this guy's brain these mice so
here's the histology low low power 100x
high power 200 X so standard diet
unrestricted you can see the dark blue
is where the heavy tumor cells are and
the lighter area is the normal brain and
you can see the massive invasion of the
cells into the normal brain these cells
are fat and happy growing like crazy
many mitotic figures in the high
carbohydrate diet can ketogenic diet
restricted you can see the white parts
is it there's a demarcation between the
tumor and the and the normal brain and
they're stopping the invasion yes the
ketogenic diet is reducing the invasion
it's also causing more spacing it's the
cells are not dividing quite as fast but
then when we put the diet with the dawn
we slaughtered these things this is all
dead cells that's all the chronic dead
death mitotic catastrophe necrotic death
all different kinds of death it's a
battlefield we slaughter those tumor
cells combining the diet
we're targeting the glucose and
retarding the glutamine simultaneously
just to show a quick picture this is my
colleagues Dominic the Agustina and
Roopa Angela pop from University of
South Florida put the cells into the
flank of the mice and here's where we
use the hyperbaric oxygen together with
the ketogenic diet and and we got
significant synergy and as I said maybe
ozone would do the same thing we haven't
tested it yet but we're going to be
putting it we're building cocktails for
building all these things now now how
does it work in humans besides what
Linda nibbling had shown ok this was our
study that we had to do in Istanbul
Turkey these guys that read my book they
said oh my god we should be using this
kind of a strategy so they're teachers
they're treating all kinds of states for
cancer patients in Istanbul Turkey and
Turkey and really really pancreatic
cancer breast cancer this is triple net
woman with triple negative breast cancer
the aro number one is pointing to the
breast where the tumor is it's in the
liver it's in certain muscle says it's
metastasized they put her on the on the
coat metabolically supported Kiba lowest
dose of chemo used with keeping with
hyperbaric oxygen used with ketogenic
diets insulin potentiation little
metformin so they're building these
cocktails and you can see on the right
the the woman's health is really good
her quality of life is excellent she's
experienced no adverse effects from the
therapy at all and they even told me we
have to use the chemo because they're
gonna take our license away if we don't
throw some chemo use the lowest dose I
said what happened if you use no chemo
that she'd be better and we're getting
the same thing with pancreatic cancer
you can't believe it ovarian cancer
lungs non-small-cell lung cancer so
there have a big clinic over there and
they're being overwhelmed now this you
don't have this picture this paper just
came out this week it's not even out yet
this is the abstract it's our paper that
I work with guys in alexandria egypt
that had a guy with a brain tumor young
man 38 years old i had no idea that they
were doing this stuff they contact me
and they say oh you got to see how well
our patients are doing using metabolic
therapy on the cancer so I said tell me
about it because you know a lot of these
physicians are great they're wonderful
like think they don't write papers they
just run around tell me your networks
that work so where's the abbot's where's
the literature
so so I said what we have to publish
this network for over a year on this
with my with my colleagues Pern and
Mariam lamian who wrote the book kitto
for cancer excellent book you should
read that book merry and clammy and
kitto for Kenshin
anyway she worked the diets this guy was
in bad shape he came into the clinic he
had deficiency in vitamin D his trike
lahia triglyceride he me his foot
triglyceride his whole body was out of
whack and beside he had a glioblastoma
his whole left side is paralyzed so they
put him on now what we did differently
here and that we've never done anywhere
for the first time is we instituted
metabolic therapy before standard of
care okay so he went on a three-day
water-only fast transition to a 950
kilocalorie a day ketogenic diet for
three weeks and then they did both the
bulking and then we went through with
the standard of care together with a
modified ketogenic diet chloroquine to
stop glucose of glutamine we used EGCG
which also targets glutamine we did
hyperbaric oxygen in other words we
threw all the things that we thought
would stop glucose in glutamine the guy
is doing fine he was a farmer a corn
farmer he's out he's back out in the
fields as we speak right he's out 25
months now and he's out working in the
fields I don't know how long the guy's
gonna live well I know is he's not
suffering alright he's not suffering so
he's doing well so we're just going to
keep going forward with these kinds of
experiments and see what happens how
many people can we keep alive in a
quality of life that's the key all right
conclusions cancer is a type of
mitochondrial metabolic disease it is
not a genetic disease okay and I think
this unfortunate misunderstanding will
at some point be recognized as the
single greatest tragedy in the history
of medicine that we have misunderstood a
disease that has led to the suffering
and death of millions of people around
the world because of a misunderstanding
I rely on some substrate level
phosphorylation for energy is the
metabolic hallmark of nearly all cancers
I say nearly all because some
as far as I can see they're all a there
might be one out there this time the
simultaneous restriction of glucose and
glutamine together with what I've shown
you can manage GBM in most other cancers
the press pulse metabolic therapy is
non-toxic cost-effective strategy for
the management of and possible and
possible resolution of all types of
cancer cancer is not a hundred different
diseases that the NIH says it is it's
one disease of energy metabolism and
that defect is in the mitochondria and
it's causing all these other
repercussion and all this crap that
we're doing in the field is all most of
it is a waste of time and money so my
collaborators are in the United States
you see a bunch of guys that I've been
working with for a long time now we're
collecting collaborators throughout the
world in Turkey Germany Venezuela
Hungary Greece France Egypt I just came
back from Shanghai China they're gonna
try to dovetail our metabolic therapy in
with their with their traditional
Chinese medicine and they've got they're
very excited about this and they've got
many many patients lined up to try to do
this I also want to thank my funding
agency single core single cause single
cure foundation Travis Kristofferson's
Foundation George Hughes foundation joe
mercola Ellen Davis at Miller Boston
College research and in the past the NIH
all right we wonderful to get money from
them but you know it's hard to get money
when you're doing therapies that
actually might work thank you thank you
very much for your attention